[MUSIC PLAYING] Generative adversarial networks, GANs for short-- GANs perform the same job as that of [INAUDIBLE], essentially. They generate new images, new data. Whether it is text, sounds, images, doesn't matter. But they work in a very different way. A GAN consists of a generator network, and think of it as a student which creates images. It also consists of a discriminator. Think of it as a teacher which judges whether the images created by the generator, the student, are realistic or not. 

In a sense, if the teacher, the discriminator, cannot distinguish an image generated by the student, or the generator, from real images, then the generated images are quite realistic. We will study how GANs work and develop techniques to train them. 

We are in the final week of the course now. I'm very glad to have had the opportunity to work with you through this course. I hope you enjoyed it as much as I enjoyed teaching it. As some parting thoughts, I will say the following. Deep learning is a very exciting and a very new field. There's a lot of opportunity here, a lot of things to explore. Even in this first course on deep learning, we have seen a number of mainstream questions that people are working on today, feverishly. 

After taking this course, you will see that you are now able to appreciate most of the topics that you see in papers or on the internet about deep learning. Enabling you to do so has been my primary goal, to give you the tools to study deep learning and work effectively with deep neural networks. This is always my goal. 

There are many tricks in deep learning today. This is also an artifact of it being a very new field. It takes time to crystallize ideas in any field. We are not there yet in deep learning. My goal has, therefore, been to give you the insight to understand why these tricks could work, dig deeper into when they might not work, and unravel some of the mysteries and the magic that you see in neural networks. 

You will learn more about this exciting field as you build deep networks of your own. Whether it is for a research project in a university or for a system that you are building in the industry, you will learn more about these models and more about the content of this course. You will build new tricks of your own that are motivated from the ones you saw here. You will gain new insight about these problems that you did not-- that will improve over time. 

But don't forget the basics when you work on these new problems. The concepts that you have learned here can be applied to new problems in a very nice way, and I hope you will take the opportunity to dig deeper into the problems while keeping the basics at the back of your mind. I wish you an exciting future in exploring this fascinating field. Thank you so much. 